Stanford University often asked question
what's the difference between bio 150
bio 250 and is it hum bio 160 no
difference it's exactly the same so like
the same requirement same unit so take
whichever one makes your life easier
procedural stuff well the answers are
back from Monday's questionnaire and a
variety of interesting answers not
surprisingly given the size of a group
why have you taken this course really
want to know about animal behavior but
willing to deal with humans because I'm
substituting it for bio 43 which I don't
want to take my dad used to make me read
books about human behavior and biology
is punishment that doesn't make any
sense I know one of the TAS so I figured
that guarantees me an A okay guys it's
in your current one I really liked
because I want to be a filmmaker after
college EA interdisciplinary what else
my first grade teacher is making me
atomic fat and told me to I'm a hyper
oxygenated dilettante I wanted to
somewhat correctly pointing out why have
you taken this class I haven't taken it
yet a number of people reporting that in
fact that was a correct answer and my
favorite why have you taken this course
yes okay
relevant background relevant background
I'm human I'm human and I often behave
I'm human and I have biology 19 years of
being confused about human behavior not
really sort of seeing crazy behavior as
an RA in a null frosh dorm and I date a
biologist let's see there was also the
question on there of the thing on the
board look more like an A or B and just
to really facilitate that when I forgot
to put the a and the B up but that taps
into a cognitive something-or-other
which maybe I'll get back to at some
point telephone numbers reading them off
accuracy dramatically tanked as soon as
the three number four number motif went
down the tubes and when it came back
briefly accuracy came back a little bit
finally let's see all of you guys
conform to a standard frequent gender
difference which is everybody was
roughly equally by gender roughly
equally likely to see dependent as the
opposite of independent a small minority
when for entity interdependent however
one finding that has come up over and
over is that far more females are
interested in peace than males males
more interested in justice okay have you
taken the bio core quote no way Jose
somebody pointing out quite correctly
don't settle for peace or justice then
of course there was the person who
responded to that question by writing
those words are just symbols need to
know assumed meeting okay
there was one question here that was
carefully signed and something
approaching calligraphy it was so
beautiful and was otherwise blank for
years running the course the subject
that most people really want to hear and
most people really don't want to hear is
about the biology of religiosity and for
22 years running now Stanford students
are more interested in depression than
sex okay so we start off I keep telling
Hennessy about this but nothing gets
done okay we start off we start off if I
can open this which is something you
could do if you have a certain type of
training if you're some osteology store
whatever you smokes are called if you
are presented those two skulls and told
this one's a female this one's a male
you can begin to figure out stuff like
how heavy how large the body was of that
individual what diseases they had had
they undergone malnutrition had they
given birth a lot of times a few times
were they bipedal all sorts of stuff you
could figure out from just looking at
these skulls what today's lecture and
Friday's is about is the fact that with
the right tools under your belt you
could look at these two skulls and know
that information you're a field
biologist and you've discovered this
brand-new species and you see that this
one nurses an infant shortly before
leaping out of tree leaving only the
skull and this one has a penis shortly
before leading leaping out of the tree
and leading leaving a skull so all you
know is this is an adult female an adult
male and if you've got the right tools
there you could figure out who's more
likely to cheat on the other is the
female more likely to mess around or is
the male how high are the levels of
aggression does the female tend to have
twins or one kid at a time do females
choose males because they have good
parenting skills or because they're big
hunky guys what levels of differences in
life expectancy
and see do they live the same length of
time you would be able to tell whether
they have the same life expectancy or if
there's a big discrepancy between the
two all sorts of stuff like that
merely by applying a certain piece of
logic that dominates all of this okay so
you're back reading those time life
nature books back when and there was
always a style of thing you would go
through which is they describe some
species doing something absolutely
amazing and unlikely and go like this
the giraffe the giraffe has a long neck
and it obviously has to a big heart to
pump all that blood up there and you
lock up a whole bunch of biomechanics
people with you know slide rules and out
they come out with this prediction as to
how big the giraffe heart should be and
how thick the walls and you go and you
measure a giraffe heart and it's exactly
what the equations predicted and you say
isn't nature amazing or you read about
some like desert rodents that drink once
every three months and another bunch of
folks have done math and figured out
like how many miles long the renal
tubules have to be and somebody goes and
studies it and it's exactly as you
expect it isn't nature wonderful no
nature isn't wonderful
you couldn't have juris unless they add
hearts that were that big you couldn't
have rodents living in the desert unless
they had kidneys that worked in a
certain way there is an inevitable logic
about how organisms function how
organisms are built how organisms have
evolved solving this problem of
optimizing a solution and what the next
two lectures are about is you can take
the same exact principles and apply them
to thinking about the evolution of
behavior the same sort of logic where
just as you could sit there and with
logical principles come to the point of
saying a giraffes heart is going to be
this big you can go through a different
realm of logic built around evolutionary
principles and figure out all sorts of
aspects of social behavior and we
already know what's involved in say
optimizing what's the optimal number of
whatever's in your kidney what's the
optimal behavior strategy
something all of us as soon as we got
like some kids sibling learn how to do
the optimal strategy in tic-tac-toe and
so that you could never lose and it's
totally boring but that's the case of
thinking about the optimal solution to
behavior reaching what is called the
Nash equilibrium and actually I have no
idea what I just said but I like making
reference to Nash because it makes me
feel quantitative or something so that
is called the Nash equilibrium the Nash
equilibrium and what the entire point
here is the same sort of process of
figuring out what are the rules of
optimizing tic-tac-toe behavior can be
built upon the principles evolution to
figure out all sorts of realms of
optimized social behavior and broadly
this is a field that's known as
sociobiology emerging in the late 1970s
mid 1970s or so and by the late 1980s
giving birth to another discipline known
as evolutionary psychology the notion
that you cannot understand behavior and
you cannot understand internal
psychological states outside the context
of evolution had something to do with
sculpting those behaviors and those
psyches so to start off with that basic
song and dance about Darwin just to make
sure we're up to speed on this Darwin
just to get some things out of the way
Darwin did not discover evolution people
knew about evolution long before that
Darwin came up with the notion of a
mechanism for evolution natural
selection and in fact Darwin isn't the
inventor of that there was another guy
Alfred Russel Wallace the two of them
and for some reason Wallace has gotten
screwed historically in Darwin gets much
more attention but starting off with a
Darwinian view of how evolution works
first thing being that there is
evolution traits in populations change
over time traits can change enough that
in fact you will get speciation new
species will form and the logic of
Darwinian evolution is built on just a
few couple of very reasonable steps
first one is that there are traits that
are heritable
traits that could be passed on one
generation to the next traits that we
now can translate in our modern parlance
into traits that are genetic and we will
see soon how that's totally not correct
to have said that but traits that are
heritable the next thing is that there
is variability among those traits
there's different ways in which this
trait can occur and they're all
heritable the next critical thing some
versions of those traits are more
adaptive than others some versions work
better for you for example giraffe who
wind up with hearts the size of like a
tomato that's not an optimal version
amid the range of variability some will
carry with them more Fitness more
adaptiveness than others and that
translates into another soundbite that's
got to be gotten rid of all of this is
not about survival of the most adapted
it's about reproduction of something we
will come to over and over again it's
about the number of copies of genes you
leave in the next generation so you've
got to have traits that are heritable
there's got to be variability in them
some of those traits are more adaptive
than others some of those traits make it
more likely that that organism passes on
copies of its genes into the next
generation and throw those three pieces
together and what you will get is
evolution in populations changing
frequencies of traits and when you throw
in one additional piece which is every
now and then the possibility to have a
random introduction of a new type of
trait in their modern parlance a
mutation from that you could begin to
get actual large changes in what a
population looks like okay so these are
the basic building blocks of Darwin and
it is easy to apply it to giraffes
hearts and kidneys of desert rats and
everything we think about in the world
of physiology anatomy in the context of
evolution so how do you apply it to
behavior and the basic notion for folks
who've won't come from this Darwinian
tradition into thinking about behavior
is you do the exact same thing there are
behavior
that are heritable types traits classes
of behaviors they come with a certain
degree of variation among individuals
some versions of them are more adaptive
than others over time the more adaptive
versions will become more commonplace
and every now and then you can have
mutations that introduce new variability
totally logical absolutely unassailable
and what we're going to spend an insane
amount of time in this class on is one
simple assumption in there which is that
certain behaviors are heritable that
certain behaviors have genetic
components and as you'll see this one is
just going to run through every lecture
wrestling with that issue there this is
a big incendiaries issue there as to how
genetic and that's not the same thing as
saying how genetically determined how
genetic behavior is okay so that's going
to be a issue we come back to again and
again so now transitioning into how you
would apply these Darwinian principles
first thing before starting a caveat
you're going to wind up in order to
think about all of this most efficiently
hopefully do some personifying
personifying as and you'll sit around
and saying well what would a female
chimpanzee want to do at this point to
optimize the number of copies of regimes
in the next generation
what would this brine shrimp want to do
to deal with this environmental stressor
what would this you know cherry tree do
they're not planning they are not
conscious they are not taking classes in
evolutionary biology
what would this organism want to do is
just a shorthand for something sculpted
by the sort of exigencies of L of
evolution and reducing the optimal they
want to do this this is just going to be
a shorthand throughout
once you get past the Apes nobody is
wanting to do any of these optimization
things so just getting that's a
terminology out of the way okay so we
start off with what's the first building
block of applying Darwinian principles
to behavior something that is absolutely
critical to emphasize because the first
thing we all need to do is unlearn some
thing we all learned back when on all
those National Geographic specials and
that would consistently teach us
something about this aspect of evolution
and would always teach it to us wrong
here's the scenario so you're watching
and there's this wildlife documentary
it's it's dawn on the savanna and you
see there's a whole bunch of lions on
top of some big old dead thing some
Buffalo or something and they're chewing
away and having a fine time so something
happens at that point which is they have
to deal with how they divvy up the food
or let me give you another example
another standard sort of endless
vignette that comes up in these films
once again now you're back on the
savanna it's not dawn this time but you
were looking at one of the Magnificent
things of the natural world which is the
migration of zebras throughout East
Africa a herd of two million of them
migrated around following a cyclic apat
urn of rains so they're always going
where the grass is greener so you've got
this wonderful herd of 2 million
wildebeest and there's a problem which
is there's some great field right in
front of them full of grass and bummer
there's a river in between them in the
next field and especially a bummer a
river teeming with crocodiles just ready
to grab them so what are the wildebeest
going to do and in according to the
National Geographic type specials we
would get out would come a solution
there's all the wildebeest hemming and
hawing in this agitated state by the end
entered the river and suddenly from the
back of the crowd comes this elderly
wildebeest who pushes his way up to the
front stands on the edge of the river
and says I sacrifice myself for you mine
kinder and throws himself into the river
where immediately the Crocs get beat he
busy eating them up and the other two
million wildebeest could tiptoe around
the other way across the river and
everybody's fine and you're then saying
why'd this guy do this why did this guy
fling himself into the river and we
would always get the answer at that
point the answer that is permeated as
like the worst urban myth of evolution
whatever why did he do
that because animals behave for the good
of the species this is the notion that
has to be completely trashed right now
animals behaving for the good of the
species really came to the forefront a
guy in the early 60s named Wynn Edwards
hyphenated Wynn Edwards some hyphenated
Brit zoologist who pushed most strongly
this notion of that animals behave for
the good of the species
he is reviled throughout every textbook
Wynn Edwards in group selection that
would be the term selection for the good
of groups for the selection for the good
of a species win Edward and group
selection I'm sure the guy did all sorts
of other useful things and anyone who
really is has any depth to them would
find out they're all I know is that the
guy is the one who came up with group
selection animals behave for the good of
the species this isn't the case at all
animals behave for passing on as many
copies of their genes as possible and
what we'll see is when you start looking
at the nuances of that sometimes it may
look like behaving for the good of the
species but it really isn't the case so
animals behave in order to maximize the
number of copies of genes they leave in
the next generation remember not
survival of the fittest reproduction of
the fittest
so first thing you need to do is go back
to that vignette and saying so what's up
with the wildebeest there and what's up
with the elderly guy jumps in the river
and finally when you look at them long
enough instead of the camera crew
showing up for three-minute when you
study this closely enough you see
something that wasn't apparent at first
which is this elderly wildebeest is not
fighting his way through the crowd this
guy is being pushed from behind this
guy's been pushed from behind because
all the other ones are saying yeah get
the old guy on the river sacrificing
himself I asked this guy is getting
pushed in by everybody else he is not
sacrificing himself for the good of the
species he does not like the idea this
whatsoever
so he gets pushed in because the old
weak guy none of this group selection
stuff what came in by the 70s
as a replacement a way to think about
this is this notion of animals including
us behaving not for the new species of
the group but to maximize number of
copies of genes left in the next
generation and what you see is three
ways in which this could occur three
building blocks the first one being
known as individual selection the first
one built around the notion that
sometimes the behavior of an animal is
meant to optimize the number of copies
of its genes that it leaves in the next
generation by its self reproducing the
drive to reproduce the drive to leave
more copies of one's genes this was once
summarized really sort of tersely as
sometimes a chicken is an egg's way of
making another chicken no that's
backwards sometimes the chicken is an
egg's way of making another egg okay
ignore that sometimes what the guy said
is sometimes a chicken is an egg's way
of making another egg all this behavior
stuff and all this animus or a social
interaction is just an epiphenomenon to
get more copies of the genes into the
next generation individual selection a
subset of way of thinking about this is
selfish genes what behavior about is
maximizing number of copies of genes in
the next generation and sometimes the
best way to do it sometimes the way that
animals maximize is to get as many
copies by way of reproducing themselves
it's not quite equivalent to the selfish
gene but for our purposes individual
selection and this can play out in a
number of realms and bringing in sort of
a big dichotomy and thinking about
evolutionary pressures Darwin and the
theory of natural selection what natural
selection is about is processes bringing
about an organism who is more adaptive
what we just went through
Darwin soon recognized there was a
second realm of selection which he
called sexual selection and what that
one's about is this is selecting for
traits that have no value whatsoever in
terms of survival or anything like that
Trey
that carry no adaptive value but for
some random bizarro reason the opposite
sex likes folks who look this way so
they get to leave more copies of their
genes and suddenly you could have
natural selection bringing about big
sharp antlers and male moose and they
use that for fighting off predators or
fighting whether the male that would be
natural selection sexual selection might
account for the fact that like the
antlers or green paisley patterns all
over for that
and for some reason that looks cool the
female moose mooses and what you wind up
getting as a mechanism for sexual
selection is as long as individuals
prefer to mate with individuals with
some completely arbitrary that traits
those traits will also become more
common
so this dichotomy of natural selection
for traits driven by traits that really
do aid leaving copies of genes outside
the realm of just sheer sexual
preference sexual selection and
sometimes they can go in absolutely
opposite directions you can get some
species where the female fish prefer
male fish that have very bright
coloration and that's advantageous than
to have the bright coloration by means
of sexual selection but the bright
coloration makes you more likely to get
predated by some other fish natural
selection pushing against the bright
coloration in males very often you've
got the two going against each other
having to balance so how would that be
applied in this realm of individual
selection this first building block
sometimes an egg 2m sometimes a chicken
is an egg's way of making another egg
sometimes what behavior is about is one
individual trying to maximize the number
of copies of their genes in the next
generation a natural selection
manifestation of it being you're good at
running away from predators selection
for speed for certain types of muscle
metabolism for certain sets of sensory
systems that will tell you there's
somebody scary around that would be the
realm of that individual selection
selecting the rule of sexual selection
to have more of whatever those traits
are that are attractive
so this first building block it's not
group selection is not behaving for the
good of the species it's behaving to
maximize the number of copies of one's
genes in the next generation and the
most straightforward way is to behave in
a way to maximize the number of times
you reproduce yourself second building
block which is there's another way of
accomplishing the same thing that you
just did with the individual selection
as follows one of the things that could
be relied upon in life is that you are
related to your relatives and what you
get is the more closely related you are
the more genes you share in common with
them on a statistical level identical
twins share a hundred percent of their
genes full siblings 50% half siblings
25% this is exactly something that's
going to be covered in the catch-up
section this week if you're not
comfortable with this stuff this sort of
thing will be reviewed in more detail
okay so the closer a relative is to you
the more copies of G the more genes they
share in common with you so suddenly
you've got this issue you're an
identical twin and you're identical
sibling has the same genes that you do
individual selection you will be just as
successful as passing on copies of your
genes into the next generation
if you forego reproducing to make it
possible for your identical twin to do
so because on a level of just sheer
numbers of copies of genes in the next
generation they are equivalent and
sometimes you will thus get behavior
which really decreases the reproductive
success of an individual in order to
enhance the success of a relative but
you've got to constraint there which is
all of your relatives don't share all
your genes with you
they have differing degrees of
relatedness and what that winds up
producing is another factor another
observation one of the great like witty
geneticists of all time a guy named Hall
Dane who apparently once a nabarro was
trying to explain this principle to
somebody and came up and said I will
gladly lay down my life for two brothers
or eight cousins and that's the math of
the relatedness
you passing on one copy of your genes to
the next generation is from the sheer
mathematics of just how evolution is
going to play out over the generations
is exactly equivalent as giving up your
life for eight cousins to be able to
each pass on a copy of their genes
because you share one-eighth with each
of them and it winds up being a whole
org and it's that math and out of that
you get something that makes perfect
sense instantly which is evolution
selects for organisms cooperating with
their relatives something along those
lines and thus we have the second
building block known as kin selection
inclusive fitness kin selection first
building block individual selection
passing on copies of your own genes as a
way to maximize future success second
version helping out relatives helping
out relatives in terms of increasing
their reproductive success with this
vicious mathematical logic which is you
know one identical twin to have civil
two full siblings eight cousins and so
on as a function of degree of
relatedness and what this begins to
explain is a whole world and animal
behavior of animals being obsessed with
kinship animals being fully aware of who
is related to who and what sorts of ways
animals being utterly aware of you
cooperate with relatives but as a
function of how closely related they are
animals put us in social anthropology
and kinship terms and could you marry
the daughter of your uncle's third wife
or whatever to shame in terms of how
much a lot of social animals deal with
relatedness so inclusive fitness kin
selection here would be evidence for it
here's one example
very cool study done some years back by
a couple Seyfarth and Cheney University
of Pennsylvania looking at vervet
monkeys and these were vervet monkeys
out in
and Xenia I believe and what they did
was a whole bunch of these vervet
monkeys were sitting around and they the
researchers had made really high-quality
Riccar recordings of various
vocalizations from the monkeys over time
so they had the sound of each animal
giving alarm call giving a friendly
gesture call giving or whatever and what
they would then do is hide a microphone
inside some bushes and play the sound of
one of the infant's from the group
giving an alarm call so what is the
mother of that infant - she instantly
gets agitated and looks over at the bush
that's her child all of that how to know
that everyone else in that vervet group
understands kin selection what does
everybody else do they all look at the
mother
that's whoever's mother what is she
going to do next they understand the
relatedness and they understand what the
response will be all the other vervets
look at the mother at that point whoa
I'm sure glad that's not my kid giving
an alarm call from the bushes they
understand kinship another version of
that that came out in these studies so
you've got two females each of whom has
a kid a daughter or whatever and female
a and female B and one day female a does
something absolutely rotten - female B
and later that day the child of female B
is more likely than chance to do
something rotten to the child of female
a they're keeping track of not only
revenge but not revenge on the
individual who did something miserable
to you but displaced by one degree of
reproduction keeping track of kinship
animals can do this all sorts of primate
species can do this and this will see
all sorts of other species can do this
also there's that caveat again all sorts
of other species
want to figure out who their cousins and
they don't want to figure out evolution
has sculpted an ability to optimize
behavior along lines of relatedness in
all sorts of species
so how would natural selection play out
in this realm of kin selection I will
lay down my life for eight cousins and
it's just sort of obvious there by now
how would sexual selection play out in
this realm I am willing to expend great
amounts of energy to convince people
that my sibling is incredibly hot and
with any chance then passing on more
copies of genes that would be inclusive
fitness kin selection in both cases
decreasing your own reproductive
potential by way of being killed by a
predator to save the eight cousins or
having to spend so much time haranguing
about your sibling doings that in order
to increase the reproductive success of
relatives where you were willing to give
up more energy and potential on your
part the more closely related the
individual is so you throw those two
pieces together and you're suddenly
often running with explaining a lot of
animal behavior individual selection
none of this for the good of the species
maximizing the number of copies of your
own genes and the easiest way the most
straightforward is you yourself
maximizing reproduction foundation
number two - the whole thing kin
selection sometimes the best way of
leaving more copies of genes in the next
generation is using up your own
reproductive potential for going to help
relatives as a function of degree
relatedness ok that's great so now the
third piece the third final building
block of making sense of social behavior
in the context of real contemporary
evolutionary theory the third block here
which is you look at animals and they're
not all just competing with non
relatives and things animals like forgo
competition at certain points animals
would have the potential to be
aggressive to other animals and they
will forego doing so and there's one
circumstance in which that can happen
where you get what is called a
rock-paper-scissors scenario you've got
animals a B and C a has a means of
damaging B but it costs a B has a means
of damaging C but it cost B C can damage
a but it costs a and you get the right
distribution of
with one of those traits in a population
and you will reach a rock-scissors-paper
equilibrium where nobody is doing
anything rotten to each other great
example totally cool example that got
published some years ago by a guy named
Brendan Bohannon who was assistant
professor in the department here at the
time he was studying something or other
about bacteria showing a
rock-paper-scissors circumstance you had
three different types three different
versions of this bacteria in this colony
he had made the first one could generate
a poison but it cost it had to put the
effort into making that poison and
protecting itself from that poison all
of that the second type was vulnerable
to the poison it happened to have some
transporter on its membrane that took up
the poison and that was bad news but it
had an advantage which is the rest of
the time that transporter took up more
food the third one the third one the
good thing going for it is that it
didn't have the bad thing was it didn't
have poison the good thing going for it
was it didn't have to spend energy on a
poison and it didn't have that
transporter so each one of those has a
strengths each one of those has a
vulnerability they're like no pokemons
or something and you put them all
together there and you get a
rock-paper-scissors scenario where you
get equilibrium where they are not
attacking each other because note if I
am a and I destroy B B's no longer
wiping out to see who's the one who can
damage me it's got to come to an
equilibrium State so you can get the
evolution of stalemates like that and
that's quite frequently seen and note
here this was the evolution of
stalemates not in chimps not in
cetaceans but in bacteria what we're
going to see is bacterial behavior to
the extent that this is sort of a
metaphor for behavior behavior of all
sorts of unlikely species are subject to
these same rules of passing on copies of
your genes these three different strains
of bacteria are competing with each
other
none of them are behaving
for the good of the species there of the
three of them so rock-paper-scissors is
very cool and you get versions of that
in humans and that's been sort of
studied quantitatively all of that but
that's not real cooperation that's
merely everybody realizing we have to
cut back on the competition we have to
cut back on the aggression because every
time I damage whoever I am more
vulnerable in another realm
that's a stalemate that's a truce but
you look at animals and in all sorts of
realms it's not just rock-paper-scissors
stalemates they're reaching they
actually cooperate with each other and
you look close enough and you see
they're not relatives they're not
relatives yet you get all sorts of
altruistic behavior and you've got it
under a whole bunch of domains because
this brings up the question why should
you ever be cooperative with another
individual if you're social animal at
every possibility
you should stab them in the back and be
selfish and the reason why that isn't a
good idea is there's all sorts of
circumstances where many hands make the
task light or whatever that is
cooperation can have synergistic
benefits and you see that with species
that are cooperative hunters where they
are not necessarily relatives they will
chase one chasing an animal while the
other is getting ready to cut a corner
on it cooperative behavior and they
increase the likelihood of them getting
a kill another example of this research
by a guy named mark Hauser at Harvard
looking at rhesus monkeys and what he
showed was he would put these monkeys in
a situation where they had access to
food they had access to food under one
circumstance where they could reach for
it and take it in and share it with
another monkey under the other
circumstance it required two monkeys to
get the food in there and what he showed
was clear-cut reciprocity monkeys who
were sharing with this guy were more
likely to get shared back with and got
more cooperation when it was a task
where two of them had to work together
to get the food one alone wasn't enough
many
to make the task lighter under all sorts
of circumstances cooperation has a
strong evolutionary payoff
even among non relatives with a
condition which is you're not putting
more into it than you are getting that
is reciprocal and this opens up the
third building block of all of this
which is reciprocal altruism cooperation
altruistic behavior among non relatives
but undergoing very strict sort of
constraints of it's got to be
reciprocated with all sorts of rules
like that so what does that look like so
you're going to see reciprocal altruism
when would you see that what's the
immediate thing what sort of species
would show systems of reciprocal
cooperation among non relatives they got
to be smart animals they got to be
social they got to be smart why don't
have to be smart because they have to
remember this is the guy who like owes
me a favor from last Thursday they need
to be able to recognize individuals they
have to be long-lived enough so that
there's a chance of interacting with
that individual again and establishing
this reciprocity you would thus predict
you would see systems of reciprocal
altruism only in long-lived social
vertebrates but you see the exact sorts
of things in bacteria you see the exact
sort of things in fungi you see that in
all sorts of other realms you get social
bacteria colonizing bacteria and where
what you might get are two clonal lines
that are together in other words two
genetically to lines each of which is
all the bacteria have the same genetic
makeup so think of it as one individual
who's just kind of dispersed another one
who's just kind of dispersed and they've
come together in something called a
fruiting body which is how bacteria
reproduce or whatever and there's two
parts to a fruiting body there's one
which is the stalk which attaches to
something or other and then there's the
part that actually fruits so you want to
be in the fruiting part because that's
the part that actually reproduce
is in the stock is doing all the work
there and what you see is attempts at
cheating attempts at one of these
strains trying to disproportionally wind
up in the fruiting part and what you
also see is the next time around this
other strain will not cooperate with it
will not form a social colony so that's
getting played off at the level of
single-cell organisms forming big social
colonies getting played at that level
yes as we will see reciprocal altruism
works most readily in big smart long
live social beast but it can occur in
all sorts of systems so what it's built
around is reciprocal cooperation and
intrinsic in that is another motivation
going on there not just to involve a
reciprocal relationship with a
non-relative and many hands and light
tasks and all of that but also whenever
possible to cheat to take advantage of
the other individual and thus another
key facet of it is to be very good at
detecting when somebody is cheating
against you to be vigilant about
cheating in what would otherwise be a
stable reciprocal relationship and an
awful lot of social behavior is built
around animals either trying to get away
with something or spotting somebody else
doing the same an example of there is a
test that's used in evolutionary
psychology where you're given this very
complicated story or another version of
a complicated story where somebody
promises if you do this you'll get this
reward but if you do that you're going
to get this punishment and like really
complex and in one outcome the outcome
of it is the person isn't supposed to
get rewarded but the individual decides
to reward them spontaneous act of
kindness in another circumstance the
person is the individual is supposed to
get rewarded and instead they get
punished
a cheater in that case and amid these
convoluted stories people are much
better seventy five percent to twenty
five are much better at detecting when
cheating has gone on in the story then
when a random act of kindness has gone
on we are more attuned to
picking up cheating and remarkably some
very subtle studies have been done with
chimps showing the chimps have the same
bias they are much better at picking up
social interactions involving cheating
than ones that involve spontaneous
altruism so you see here this balance
between cooperation and reciprocal and
even among non relatives and that's
great but you should cheat when you can
get away with it but you should be
vigilant against cheaters and what of
course it comes down to then is
tic-tac-toe and giraffe hearts and all
of that what is the optimal strategy in
a particular social species for a
particular individual what is the
optimal strategy when do you cooperate
and when do you cheat when do you defect
on the cooperative relationship you've
had and this introduces us to a whole
world of mathematics built around what
is called game theory the notion that
there are games formal games that have
mathematically optimal strategies or
multiple strategies multi equilibrium
and a whole world of research has been
built around them in terms of when to
cooperate and when to defect so game
theory stuff this was starting off in a
world of like people studying economics
and negotiation and diplomacy and all of
that and that was a whole world built
around this logic of when do you
cooperate when do you cheat and what
came out of there were all sorts of
models of how to optimize behavior in
terms of that and the building blocks
sort of the fruit fly of game theory is
a game called the prisoner's dilemma
prisoner's dilemma of sort of cutting
two is already going to really tails two
individuals or prisoners and they escape
and they're both captured and they're
interrogated separately and if both of
them refuse to talk that's great for
them if they both squeal they both get
punished if one of them is able to
squeal on the other one they get a great
word if the other one what you get
formally are four possible outcomes both
individuals cooperate
both individuals cheat against each
other individual a cooperates and B
cheats
individual B cooperates and a cheats and
what you get in prisoner's dilemma is a
formal payoff for each what gives you
the greatest payoff stab and the other
guy in the back you cheat and they
cooperate you have exploited them you
have taken advantage of them isn't that
wonderful
that's the highest payoff in prisoner
dilemma games second-highest payoff you
both cooperate third highest payoff
which is beginning to not Canada's two
payoff but in a lot of the games is set
up as the start of punishment both of
you cheat on each other fourth worst
possible payoff is you're the sucker you
cooperate and the other individual stabs
you in the back so what the prisoner's
dilemma game is set up these
circumstances where individuals will
play versions of this against each other
with varying rewards and that sort of
thing and parameters that we will look
at in a lot of detail and seeing when is
it optimal to cooperate when is it
optimal to cheat when would you do this
so you've got examples of this and this
was the building block and what anyone
would say looking at this is it's
obvious what you want to do is in some
way rationally maximize your payoff this
is this whole world of homo economists
the notion of humans as being purely
rational decision makers and what you
begin to see in this world of game
theory is there is anything but that
going on and later in the course we are
going to see something very interesting
people playing prisoner's dilemma games
inside a brain scanner looking at a part
of the brain that has a lot to do with
pleasure and what you see is some
individuals activate that part of the
brain when they've successfully stabbed
the other guy in the back some
individuals activate it when they have
both cooperated and there's a big gender
difference as to which circumstance so
you just guess which one is going on
there we're going to see a number of
studies like that coming down the line
the question becomes how do you optimize
prisoner dilemma play and what emerged
at that time was the notion of all sorts
of theoretical models and stuff and then
in the 1970s there was an economist a
University of Michigan named Robert
Axelrod who revolutionized the entire
field what he did was he took some
Paleolithic computer and programmed in
how the prisoner's dilemma would be
played and he could program in as if
there were two players and he could
program in what each one strategy would
be and what he then did was he wrote to
all of his buddies and all of his
mathematician friends and prize fighters
and theologians and serial murderers and
Nobel Peace Prize winners and in each
case explain what was up and saying what
strategy would you use in a prisoner's
dilemma game and he gets them all back
and he programs all these different
versions and he runs a round-robin
tournament every strategy is paired
against every other strategy at one
point or other and you look at what the
payoff is you ask which is the most
optimal strategy and out of it
shockingly to everyone because this was
a computer teaching us optimizing human
behavior out of it came one simple
strategy that always out computer the
others this is people sitting there
probabilistic ones as to when to
cooperate and lunar cycles as to what to
do the one that always won is now called
tit for tat
you start off cooperating in the very
first round with the individual you
cooperate if the individual has
cooperated with you in that round you
cooperate in the next round and you
cooperate cooperate as long as the other
individual cooperates but as soon as
there's a round where the individual
cheats against you you cheat against
them the next time if they cheated at
you that time also you cheat against
them the next time if they go back to
cooperating you go back to cooperating
the next time you have this tit-for-tat
strategy in the absence of somebody
stabbing you in the back you will always
cooperate
and what they found was run these
hundreds of thousands of versions of
these round-robin tournaments and
tit-for-tat was the one that was most
optimal to begin to use a word that is
not just going to be a metaphor tit for
tat always drove the other strategies
into extinction and what you wound up
seeing is this optimized strategy and it
was very clear why tit for tat worked so
well number one it was nice you start
off cooperating number two it retaliates
if you do something crummy to it number
three it is forgiving if you go back to
cooperating number four its clear-cut in
its play it's not some probabilistic
thing and what you get then with tit for
tat is suppose you're playing three
rounds with another individual you both
cooperate the first one you both
cooperate the next one you're playing
tit for tat strategy so you cooperate on
this one and they stab you in the back
and you can't get back at them because
this is the last round what you'll see
is under lots of circumstances tit for
tat is dis advantageous but what the
soundbite is about it is tit for tat may
lose the battles but it wins all the
wars this pattern of being nice but
being retaliatory being forgiving and
being clear in the rules drives all the
other strategies into extinction okay at
this point my alarm just went off which
was to remind me to ask somebody who is
wearing a life vest is somebody wearing
a life vest over there um where are you
she left isn't that interesting somebody
put me up to having to ask this person
why are you wearing a life vest and
apparently the answer she would give was
going to free all sorts of captives in
some like rebel group in Colombia and
she fled okay what that does is I don't
know what that says about reciprocal
altruism but what that says also is
after I do a summary don't make a move
we will have a five minute break so what
do we have at this point we have a first
building block of optimizing the
evolution
like optimizing giraffe hearts first
piece you don't believe behave for the
good of the species individual selection
passing on as many copies of your own
genes as possible sometime a chicken is
an egg's way of making another egg he
says triumphantly building block number
two Ken selection some of the time the
best way to pass on copies of your genes
is by way of helping relatives kin
selection with the mathematical
fierceness of degree of relatedness
driving at piece 3 sometimes what's most
advantageous is to cooperate even with
non relatives but with the rules of it
has to be reciprocal and you have to
cheat when possible you have to be on
guard against cheaters and as we've just
seen game theory prisoner's dilemma
beginning to formalize optimal
strategies for that ok let's take five
minute break but you promise you will
come back if you go out and everyone
will wander off maximize that behavior
in a very artificial realm but stay
tuned prisoner's dilemma as the building
block of how to do this
amid lots of other types of games that
are used the prisoner's dilemma is the
most basic one and that round-robin
tournament that computer simulation
axelrod asking all his buddies to tell
him what strategy would you use run them
against each other and outcomes tit for
tat tit for tat drives all the others
into extinction
however there is a vulnerability in
tit-for-tat which is
okay so we have the technical way of
showing prisoner's dilemma play and
first round both individuals are
cooperating second round both
individuals are cooperating third round
this one cheats
those are fangs this one's sheet and
this one cooperates or the next round
this one now cheats and this one goes
back to cooperating and we've just
gotten through a scary thing that tit
for tat solves and it's great wonderful
what if though your system is not a
hundred percent perfect
what if there's the possibility of a
mistake being made of sending the wrong
signal
what if there's the possibility of noise
in the communication system and at some
point an individual who does a
cooperative behavior thanks to a glitch
in the system
it is read as having been defected
defection so what happens as a result
this individual forget it
okay what happens as a result the
individual who cooperated but somehow
the message got through is cheating they
don't know something got lost in the
wires between them and translation the
other individual is saying whoa
that individual cheated against me I'm
going to cheat in the next round
so along comes the next round and that
individual cheats against them this one
who's cooperating because they've been
cooperating all along they don't know
about this error and they say whoa that
person just cheated against me I'm going
to cheat in the next round so they cheat
in the next round this one says whoa
they just cheated another time again and
again and again and what you get is a
seesaw pattern for the rest of time
you've just wiped out 50% of the
cooperation and what you've got is tit
for tat strategies are vulnerable to
signal error that's something that soon
came out in these studies of Axelrod's
and when I was a kid there was like one
of these like thriller books I remember
reading where there's a glitch in the
system and at
I mean scary Soviet Union launched a
missile that knows the United States the
United States by accident launched a
missile a nuclear weapon where they
didn't mean to some cockroach
you know chewed through the wire
someplace or other and the missile went
off and wound up being destroying Moscow
and oh my god we had a cooperative
system of mutually sort of restraint of
aggression all of that and thanks to a
signal error a cheating signal was
accidentally sent off and how did the
book end a tit-for-tat response in order
to avoid sort of thermonuclear wasteland
the Soviet Union was allowed to destroy
New York okay so that shows exactly how
you could then get into a see-sawing
thing simply by way of if the system has
any vulnerability to signal error so it
soon became clear assumes Axelrod began
to introduce the possibility of signal
errors that tit-for-tat didn't work as
well as another strategy one that
quickly came to the forefront and that
one for some strange reason that's the
ways that one was called forgiving tit
for tat what happens with forgiving tit
for tat the usual rule like tit for tat
if you cooperate if they cooperate you
always cooperate if they cheat against
you you punish them in the next round
exactly same thing as tit for tat but oh
no what if there's a signal error in the
system and you've gotten caught in one
of these horrible see-sawing things
what forgiving tit for tat does is we'll
have a rule for example that if we
seesaw like this five times in a row I
will forego cheating the next time and
instead I'll cooperate and that will get
things back on track I am willing to be
forgiving in one round in order to
reestablish cooperation after the signal
error came in and that one as soon as
you introduced the possibility of signal
error that one outcompetes tit for tat I
guess it makes perfect sense it's a
great way of solving that problem
so that was terrific tit for tat that
the ability forgive and what you would
then see is variability how many of
these do you need to go through before
you forgive what's the optimal number of
C songs all that's a whole world of
optimizing how soon you are forgiving
nonetheless the general theme being
forgiving tit for tat outcompete stood
for tab when you can have signal error
but there is a vulnerability there is a
vulnerability here to this one which is
you could be exploited if you're playing
against for example a tit for tat er or
all sorts of other strategies where they
don't have forgiving strings of
defection and you do what's going to
happen is you're going to keep going
back to cooperating and they're going to
keep stabbing in your back forgiving tit
for tat is vulnerable to exploitation
playing against individual players that
don't have forgiveness in it so what
soon became apparent was an even better
strategy which is you start off with a
tit-for-tat strategy which is you are
punitive you are retaliatory amid being
forgiven clear nice initially you were
willing to punish and you cannot be
exploited in this way if and only if you
have gone whatever number of rounds
without the other individual ever
cheating on you if you've gone long
enough without that happening you switch
over to forgiving tit for tat what is
that that's deciding you trust somebody
you've had enough interactions with them
that you are willing to trust them this
is the transition from pure rational
optimizing to switching over forgiveness
coming in there protects you from signal
error and of course now a whole world of
how many rounds you need to do this
before you switch that as to what the
optimal deal with that is but again this
is a way of transitioning to solve the
problem of signal error but forgiving
too readily and being taken advantage of
soon another strategy appeared which was
called Pavlov and those of you who know
Pavlovian psychology will see that this
in fact has nothing whatsoever to do
with Pavlovian psychology and I don't
know why they did that but they thought
it was kind of cool but the rule was
remember if you stab the other guy in
the back you get a bunch of points if
you both cooperate you get points not as
many if you both cheat you lose some
points if you're taken advantage of you
lose a lot of points so two outcomes you
gain two outcomes you lose in Pavlov the
simple rule is when I do something if I
get points if I get some degree of
reward I do it again the next time if I
get rewarded either the first two types
of payoffs I do the same thing again and
the other part of course is and if I
have if I play my strategy and I lose
one of the two bottom the two bottom
outcomes I switched to the other
strategy the next time and what you see
is that can establish very good
tit-for-tat stuff but if you sit and
spend hours tonight with you know a long
roll of toilet paper and playing out all
the rounds of it you will see what
Pavlov allows you to do is exploit
somebody else who is forgiving so Pablo
goes along just fine with this and as
long as Pablo continues whenever they
switch over to a forgiving tit for tat
pavlovo out-compete them because Pavlov
exploits what they then emerged was just
zillions of people studying all sorts of
games like this there's other ones
ultimatum game as a trust game but it's
the same notion of business there which
is you choose to cooperate you choose to
cheat what's the optimal outcome there
are mathematically optimal outcomes that
you can use and you run all of it
against the computer and you get the
optimization popping out the other end
wonderful so there's Axelrod and his
buddies using terms like oh this
strategy will drive the other one into
extinction or this strategy works
if you program in that every now and
then there could be a glitch there can
be a mutation this will be they're using
all this biology jargon obviously
metaphorically but right around this
point the biologists look at this who
are just beginning to think about the
sociobiology stuff formal patterns of
optimizing behavior and they say whoa
does this apply to the behavior of real
organisms is at this point it's just
economists and computer types and
diplomats learning when to optimize all
that sort of thing around the time there
was a paper published somewhat before
that this is a name nobody is going to
know lost in history a guy named Daniel
Ellsberg Daniel Ellsberg became very
famous around 1970 by he was working in
the Pentagon and he stole thousands of
pages of secret files there and gave it
to the New York Times showing how
utterly corrupt everything that went on
behind the scenes was and getting us
into Vietnam major blowout all of that
he had spent the early part of his
career perfectly happily working in the
Pentagon for the military as a game
theorist as a game theorist coming up
with optimal patterns and he wrote one
paper called the optimal benefits of
perceived madness what what times do you
want your opponent to think you are
absolutely out of your mind and going to
do all sorts of crazy stuff and where
they wind up cooperating to keep you
from doing that the advantages of
madness what's of that that systems were
things like mutually assured destruction
doesn't work because you're really
willing to set it off that the
advantages of math is this whole world
of people working on it mathematicians
and more strategist and there's the
zoologists now looking at this saying
whoa this is cool I wonder if animals
behave that way and that's when people
now armed with their insights into
prisoner's dilemma and tit-for-tat and
all this stuff started to go and study
animals out in the wild and see were
there any examples where this happened
yeah
in all sorts of interesting realms first
example vampire bats vampire bats we are
all set up to be creeped out by vampire
bats but in actuality when you see a
vampire about drinking the blood of some
cow or something you are watching a
mommy getting food for her babies
because vampire bat mothers are not
actually drinking the blood they're
filling this throat sac thing and they
go back to the nest and they discord the
blood to feed their babies she's just
watching out for her kids
it happens that vampire bats have an
interesting system of reciprocal
altruism which is a whole bunch of
females will share the same nest will
have all their kids in there mixed in
and these are not necessarily related so
we've just left the world of kin
selection they're not necessarily
related but they have reciprocal
altruism each female comes in
discouraged the disc gorges the blood
and feeds everybody's babies and they'll
all feed each other's babies and
everything is terrific and they have
this blood vampire commune going there
and they have reached in my state of
stable cooperation now make the bats
think that one of the females is
cheating on them outcomes that female
flying off to find some blood and
instead you net her and get a hold of
her and take some syringe full of air
and pump up the throat sack so the
throat sack is really full and distended
but there's no blood in there you've
just pumped air into there and stick her
back into the nest there and she's just
sitting there happily and the other
females are sitting saying look at her
look at how much blood she's got there I
can't believe it because she's not
feeding our kids she's cheating on us
and the next time they go out to feed
the other females don't feed her kids a
tit-for-tat what you saw here is an
exact example of introducing signal
error signal error in this case being
some grad student pumping up the throat
of some vampire bat and showing that
they're using a version of a tit-for-tat
strategy totally amazing people were
blown away by this
another example fish
stickleback fish who in the world of
animals you know bats are probably not
some of the brightest folks around but I
don't think sticklebacks are within
light-years of them which stickleback
fish can do a tit-for-tat strategy
here's what you do you have a
stickleback fish in your in your fish
tank and you make the fish you make him
believe that he's being attacked by
another fish what do you do you put a
mirror up against the edge of the tank
there so within a very short time I told
you they were not that smart so then in
a very short time he's lunging forward
at this mirrored thing and maintaining
his territory against this guy and
barely holding on and that other guy's
just he doesn't get tired thank God I
don't get tired and they're just going
at it on and now make him think he has a
cooperative partner put in a second
mirror that's perpendicular here in
other words he sees his reflection there
and every time he moves forward he sees
that one moving forward and which is
fortunate because he's also seeing
another fish coming from that way and he
say they're saying this is great I don't
know who this guy is but wow what a team
we are doubles this is great he's in
there and the think it's funny how those
two guys are so synchronized the whoa
we're holding him off we're doing it now
make him think his cooperating partner
is in fact cheating on him take the
mirror and angle it back a little bit so
the reflection is set back some and what
he now sees is the fish moving forward
but not all the way up to the wall there
the fish is hanging back there the fish
is cheating and this stickleback is
sitting there saying in effect that son
of a bitch I can't believe he's doing
that to me we work together every years
I can't believe you
oh he's pretending to go forward but I
see he's not really doing that
fortunately that guy isn't coming
forward anymore either whew but I can't
believe that guy's cheating and the next
time you set up this scenario the next
time move the chance this stickleback
doesn't attack its own reflection there
it is tit for tiding against this guy so
here we've managed to set up one of
these deals within one fish and carrying
it out forever
one fish ultimately improved some very
blistered lips tit for tat once again
another example this is the most bizarre
one I can imagine and leads to all sorts
of subjects that are going to come many
lectures from now but there are fish
species that will change sexes and they
do it under all sorts of strategic
circumstances that suddenly begin to fit
into this realm of what we've been
learning about and you've got one of
these things called black Hamlet fish
and they can change gender so you'll
have a pair of them who hang out with
each other of opposite genders and they
take turns they flip back and forth for
a while this one's female and for a
while this one's female and they go back
and forth and that's great but there's
an inequity there which is that the
price of reproduction is greater for the
female than for the male as is the case
in so many species the female is doing
all that egg and oviduct and
progesterone stuff or whatever it is and
the males just got to come up with some
sperm they're doing reproduction as a
cooperating pair they're not relatives
reciprocal altruism maximizing each of
their reproductions whoever's the female
in any given round is the one who is
paying more and what you see are
reciprocal relationships there of the
fish using tit for tat if you get one
fish that begins to cheat and winds up
being a male too much of the time the
other fish stops cooperating with them
again tit for tat stuff so people were
just blown out of the water at this
point
seeing whoa forget rational human
economic thinking all of that you go out
into the wild and bats and stickleback
fish and gender switching fish and all
of that they're following some of the
exact same strategies isn't nature
amazing no nature isn't amazing it's the
exact
same logic as saying a giraffe has to
have a heart that's strong enough to
pump blood to the top of the head of a
giraffe or else there wouldn't be
giraffe and when you look at this realm
it's applying the same notion the same
sort of wind tunnel of selective
optimization for behavior in this case
when did she'd want to cooperate sculpt
something that is as optimized as a
giraffes heart being the right size so
this made perfect sense wonderful but
then people began to look a little bit
closer and began to see sort of a very
distressing real-world beginning to
creep in there which were exceptions
first exception this was done by a guy
named Craig Packer University in a soda
looking at Lions in East Africa and what
you get is typically prides are a whole
bunch of relatives usually female
sisters nieces all of that but you will
sometimes get prides that are not of
close relatives nonetheless they will
get you know reciprocal altruistic
things going on lions in this case
having the same trick as was done on
those vervet monkeys researcher putting
inside the bush there a speaker and
playing the sound of like four hundred
menacing lions all at once and you know
what you're supposed to do is freak out
at that point and all of you need to
very carefully approach and see what's
going on in that bush so what would
happen in a reciprocal system and
everybody to use this does this or if
one time one of them cheats on you you
push that one forward the next time or
somesuch saying that's what you would
expect but what he would begin to notice
is in a bunch of these groups there'd be
one scaredy-cat lion one who habitually
stayed behind the others and who wasn't
punished for it so this produced this
first puzzle that oh sometimes animals
aren't optimizing tit-for-tat sometimes
animals haven't read Robert Axelrod's
landmark 1972 paper that sort of thing
and what do you suddenly have is the
real world what could be possible
explanations one thing being maybe
they're not really paying attention
maybe they're not quite that smart wait
bacteria are doing versions of
tit-for-tat
else could be going on Oh lions interact
in other realms maybe this individual is
doing very reciprocal stuff forgiving
overly altruistic stuff in some other
realm of behavior maybe this lion is
each less of the meat and backs off
earlier or something like that maybe
there's another game going on
simultaneously and this introducing the
real world in which it is not just two
individuals sitting there playing
prisoner's dilemma and optimizing you
suddenly begin to get real-world
complexities coming in it and by the
time we get to the lectures way down the
line on aggression and cooperation what
you will see is things get really
complicated when you have individuals
playing games simultaneously the rules
that you apply to one psychologically
begin to dribble into the other one
all sorts of things like that it will
get very complicated so a first hint
there that in fact everything doesn't
work perfectly along those lines here's
another version here's one of the truly
weird species out there something called
the naked mole rat if you ever have
nothing to do and you've got Google
image up there go like spend the evening
looking up close-up pictures of naked
mole rats these are like the weirdest
things out there they are the closest
things among the mammals to social
insects in terms of how their colonies
work they're totally bizarre all of that
but they live in these big cooperative
colonies that are predominantly
underground in Africa and they were
discovered I think only in the 1970s or
so and for a while when zoologist got
together
if you were a naked mole-rat person you
were just the coolest around and
everybody else would feel intimidated
because you were working on the best
species out there and you would see
these big cooperative colonies soon
shown to not necessarily be a relatives
and reciprocity all those sorts of rules
but people soon began to recognize there
would be one or
two animals in each colony that weren't
doing any work work digging out tunnels
bookkeeping on a wood naked mole-rats do
in terms of work but there would be a
few individuals who would just be
sitting around and there was these big
old naked mole-rats they were much
bigger than the other ones and they were
scarfing up food left and right there
goes Robert Axelrod down the drain there
goes all that optimization because no
one would be punishing these guys what's
the deal
and it took enough watching these
animals long enough to see this notion
of oh there's another game going on in
which they play a more important role
and it is sort of dribbling across when
the rainy season comes these big naked
mole-rats go up and turn around and they
plug the entry to the tunnels line
that's what they do
and suddenly these guys who have been
sitting around doing no work whatsoever
all year and eating tons of stuff they
suddenly have to now stick their rear
ends out for the Coyotes to be around or
whatever it is that predates them what
we have is role diversification real
animals real organisms are not just
playing one formal prisoner's dilemma
game against each other at the same time
and by the time we again get to the
later lectures on aggression cooperation
all of that we will not only see that
things get much more complicated when
you're playing simultaneous games when
you're playing a game against one
individual while you're playing against
another one and them against triangular
circumstances how play differs if you
know how many rounds you are playing
against the individual versus if you
have no idea how play differs if when
you were about to play against someone
you get to find out what their behavior
has been in the previous trials with
other individuals in other words if
somebody shows up with a reputation
we'll see this is a much more
complicated world of playing out these
games a much more realistic one so we
begin to see a first pass at all this
optimization stuff and how great that
all is one final interesting addition to
this game theory world of thinking about
behavior
that which came from a guy named James
Holland who apparently might have a
different first name but Holland
apparently as an interesting piece in
history he's the purse first person to
ever get a PhD in computer sciences
which I think was in the late 50s
University of Michigan apparently there
are realms of you know computer
programmers who worship this guy and he
like a lot of other folks in that
business got interested in this game
theory evolution of optimal strategies
and he designed ways of running all of
this and he introduced a new ripple
which is the possibility of a strategy
suddenly changing the possibility of a
mutation and what he could then study
was mutations how often they were
adaptive how often they spread
throughout the strategy they're of
individuals playing how often they drove
the other strategies into extinction
versus ones that broom quickly driven to
extinct in themselves more cases where
we are getting these systems where maybe
they're not just metaphorically using
terms from biology maybe they are
exactly modeling the same thing and we
will see more and more evidence for that
okay so reciprocal altruism how would
that play out in the world of natural
selection natural selection cooperative
hunting and there's lots of species that
have cooperative hunting wild dogs
jackal some other species as well that's
clearly that's like the definition of
cooperative hunting of cooperative
reciprocal altruism if they're not
relatives how would sexual selection
play out in the realm of reciprocal
altruism a little bit less obvious there
that would be if you and some non
relatives spent an insane amount of
energy and time making sure you both
look really good before going to the
prom that would be sexual selection
working on reciprocal altruistic system
so what we have now are our three
building blocks
this whole trashing of it's not survival
of the fittest it's not behaving for the
good of the species it's not behaving
for the good of the group but instead
these three building blocks the ways to
optimize as many copies of your genes in
the next generation as possible way
number one into
visual selection a version of selfish
genes sometimes a chicken is an egg's
way of making another egg behavior is
just a way of getting copies of genes
into the next generation piece number
two inclusive fitness kin selection that
whole business that sometimes the best
way of passing on copies is to help
relatives do it and it's as a function
of how related their the whole world of
cooperation more among related organisms
than unrelated ones and as we will see
way down the line what is very
challenging in different species is how
do you figure out who you're related to
and humans do it in a very unique way
that sets them up for being exploited in
all sorts of circumstances that begin to
explain why culture after culture people
are really not nice to them and it flows
along those lines this is something we
will get to a lot of detail so degree of
relatedness a lecture coming how do you
tell who you're related to but that
second piece kin selection third piece
reciprocal altruism you scratch my back
and I'll scratch your back and whenever
possible you want to instead scratch
your back and they want to make sure
you're not scratching your back or
whatever cheating counts as but trying
to achieve being vigilant against it
formal games where you can optimize it
very complicated and can you believe it
you go out into the real world and you
find examples of precisely that
optimization with tit for tat isn't
nature wonderful it's got to work that
way and then you begin to see how the
real world is more complicated multiple
roles naked mole-rats stuck in plumbing
things of that sort
okay so these are the principles and
what people of the school of
evolutionary thought would say armed
with these sorts of principles you could
now look at all sorts of interesting
domains of animal behavior and
understand what the behavior is going to
be like by using these okay we start
with the first example here we return to
these guys and we have one species here
and knowing this guy had a penis and
this one nursed we've got an adult male
and adult female what is it that you can
conclude
food in this species males are a lot
bigger than females
so let's state it here as there's a big
ratio of males to females meanwhile in
the next County you've discovered
another species where somebody's got a
penis in somebody else's nursing and
their skulls are the exact same size
oh here's the species where there's no
difference in body size between males
and females okay so let's begin to see
just using the principles we've got in
hand already what sort of stuff we can
predict starting okay which of those
species in one case you have males being
a lot bigger than females in one case
you've got males being the same size as
females
in which of those species the first one
like this or the same sized ones and
which ones would you expect to see more
male aggression first one okay how come
their bodies are built for it which
begins to tell you something their
bodies are built for it maybe because
females have been selecting for that you
will see higher levels of aggression in
species like this where there's a big
body size difference and much less of it
in these guys next you now ask how much
variability is there in male
reproductive success in one of these
species all the males have one or two
kids over their lifetime and another
species 95% of the reproducing is
carried out by five percent of the
male's a huge variability skew and male
reproductive success which species do
you get the every male has a couple of
kids and that's about it and all equally
so which one second one how come because
these guys are being selected for
aggression if they're fighting there's
going to have to be something they're
fighting for differential reproductive
access okay so you see more variability
and species that look like this
next females come into the equation what
do females want what do females want in
the species on the Left versus the one
on the right the one on the right you
know again
skulls the same size same body size on
the left what does the female want what
sort of male is the female interested in
big exactly that's exactly the driving
force on this how come because she's not
going to get anything else out of this
guy this guy is just going to like the
present is going to be some sperm it
might as well be some good sperm some
genetically well-endowed sperm that
makes for a big healthy offspring
increasing the odds of her passing on
copies for genes in the next generation
what about in this species
what's females looking for okay good
hold on to that for a second and let's
jump ahead a few lines one of the
species males have never been known to
do the slightest affiliative thing with
infants they just get irritated or
harassed and all of that and the other
you have soccer dads who are doing as
much raising of the kids as the females
are in which species do you get lots of
male parental behavior the one on the
right okay so lots of male parental
behavior here so somebody just gave the
answer here female choice what would you
see in this species you want big
muscular guys you want whatever is
selling that season for what counts as a
hot male because you want your offspring
to have those traits and somebody else
called out here what do females want in
this category and what was it you said
good personality yes
able to express emotions
that too okay somebody else shouted out
something that gets at the broader more
globally Oprah version okay somebody
shout it out perturb parental behavior
you want a male who's going to be
competent at raising your children what
is it that you want really most deeply
you want to get the male who is the most
like a female you can get a hold of you
don't want some big old stupid guy with
a lot of muscle and canines who's
wasting energy on stuff like that that
he could be using instead on you know
reading Goodnight Moon or some such
thing what you want instead is somebody
who's as close to a female as you can
get to without getting this lactation
stuff males are chosen who are the same
size as females so the term given here
is you know choosing for paternal
behavior parental behavior or don't
let's just put that in there and that
begins to explain the top-line species
in which there's a lot of sexual
dimorphism morphism shapes of things
sexual dimorphism big difference in body
size as a function of gender and and
these sorts of species where you get
male parental behavior not much
variability male reproductive success
low levels of regression what females
want is a competent male these are ones
where you see low degrees of sexual
dimorphism so how's the female going to
figure out that this guy is going to be
a competent parent you know once again
we just figured out if he looks kind of
like you because that suggests he hasn't
wasted health and metabolism on stupid
pointless muscles when there's more
important things in life for making sure
your kids have good values what else
would the female want to know when she's
first considering mating with the male
see a nice guy as he sensitivities
express his feelings is he competent at
being a parent what do you want the
individual to do prove to you that he
can provide for the kids and suddenly
you have a world of bird male birds
courting the females by bringing them
worms bringing them evidence that they
are able to successfully forage they are
able to get
food female choice is built around
appearance and behavioral competence at
being able to be a successful parent in
order to pass on as many copies of jeans
the next generation as possible
okay how about lifespan and which
species is there a big difference and
life expectancy is a function agender
first one here are you choosing for
males to be as close to females as
possible and unless the physiology here
you got these guys who are like using
huge amounts of energy to build up all
this muscle which takes a lot more work
to keep in calories and you're more
vulnerable and famines you've got these
males with high testosterone which does
bad stuff to your circulatory system
you've got males who thanks to all this
aggression are getting more injuries
more likely in species in which you have
a lot of sexual dimorphism and body size
you get a lot of sexual dimorphism and
lifespan and then you look at these guys
and it's basically no difference by
gender moving on
considering primates that are one of
these two patterns in which one do you
always want to give birth to twins and
which one do you never want to give
birth to twins who gives birth to twins
the one on the right of course how come
because you've got two parents on the
scene you are not a single mother and
you are a single mother rhesus monkey or
something and you give birth to twins
and you do not have the remotest chance
of enough energy enough calories on
board to get both of them to survive a
twin that is born in the species like
this has the same rate that it occurs in
humans about a 1% rate and it is almost
inevitable that one of them does not
survive meanwhile there's a whole world
of primate species with this profile
where the females always twin finally
you are the female and you are
contemplating bailing out on your kids
and disappearing because there's some
really hot guy over there who you want
to mate with and you are trying to
figure out this strategy so you are
going to leave and abandon your kids in
which species do you see that behavior
the one on the right the one other
right because you bailout and the male
is there taking care of them you bailout
in here and you've lost your investment
and copies your jeans for the next
generation
you see female cuckoldry this great
Victorian term you see females cheating
on the fathers in this species but not
in species like this because the father
is long gone and you know three other
counties they're courting somebody else
and doesn't matter you're not going to
get any help from him in primate species
of this profile you always see twinning
and they both survive and what studies
have shown in these species and we'll
get to them shortly is after birth in
fact the males are expending more
calories taking care of the offspring
than the females go bail out on him and
go find some other hot guy which in your
species counts as some guy who looks
even more like you than he does in terms
of what you want out of the individual
so that so what have we done here we've
just gone through applying these
principles in this logical way and
everybody from the very first step was
getting the right outcome and go and
these are exactly the profiles you find
in certain species among social mammals
these would be referred to as a
tournament species a tournament species
whereas the one on the right is referred
to as a pair bonding a monogamous
species because in this one males and
females stay together because they both
have equivalent investment and taking
care of the kids all of that what you
have here is this contrast between
tournament species and pair-bonding
species tournament species these are all
the species where you get males with big
bright plumage
these are peacocks these are all those
bird and fish species where the males
are all brightly colored what are the
females choosing for peacock feathers
does not make for a good peacock mother
peacock feathers are signs of being
healthy enough that you can waste lots
of energy on these big stupid pointless
feathers that's a sign of health that's
a sign of all I'm gettin from this
peacock is genes I might as well go for
good ones that's the world of peacocks
that's the world of chickens with
pecking orders dominating like that lots
of a
that's the world of primates where as in
Savannah baboons the male was twice as
big as the female tournament species
where a lot of passing on of genes is
decided by male-male aggression in the
context of tournaments producing massive
amounts of variability and reproductive
success where males are being selected
for being good like this so they sure
being selected for having big bodies
which wins a meaning a shortened
lifespan for a bunch of reasons females
are choosing for that these are guys who
are not using their energy on parental
behavior thus you do not want to have
twins if you were a female baboon and
you do not want to bail out on the kids
because nobody else is going to take
care of them go and look at a new
primate species and see this much of a
difference in skull size and you've just
be able to derive everything else about
its social behavior meanwhile these guys
on the right pair bonding species these
are found among South American monkeys
marmosets tamarins you put up a picture
of them which I will do if I ever mask
your powerpoint in some subsequent
lecture you put up a picture of a
marmoset pair and you can't tell who's
the male and the female this is not the
world of mandrill baboons with males
with big bright bizarre coloration on
the face and with antlers when the
females don't in that whole world of
sexual dimorphism you can't tell which
one is the male and which one is the
female marmoset by looking at them you
can't tell by seeing how long they live
you can't tell by how much they're
taking care of the kids you can't tell
in terms of their reproductive
variability that's a whole different
world of selection all of the South
American tamarins and marmosets the
females always twin they have a higher
rate of cuckoldry of abandoning the kids
the male's take as much care if not more
of the kids in the female does very low
levels of aggression same body size same
life span all the males have low degree
of variability how come because if
you're some marmoset male you don't want
to get 47 marmoset females pregnant
because you are going to have to take
care of all the kids because as we will
see way down the line and lectures on
parental behavior the wiring there is
such is bonding with the offspring and
taking care of them know
wonder among species like these you have
very low variability all the males
reproduce once or twice this is the
world of 5% of the guys accounting for
95% of the matings this is totally
remarkable because again that starting
point you start off here and you look at
these and oh you can tell if they were
bipedal and or they diseased a
malnourished
simply by applying these principles of
individual selection reciprocity all of
that one factoid you see a new primate
species and you see one nursing and one
with a penis and they're the same size
or there's different to the size and you
already know all about their social
system very consistent across birds
across fish across primates of course
all of those this dichotomy between
tournament species and pair bonding
species as we will see way down the line
among some species types of voles
rodents that are famous and hallmark
cards for their pair bonding for their
monogamy so we'll see they're not quite
as monogamous as you would think but
nonetheless a general structure like
this so one asks expectedly where two
humans fit in on this one where do
humans fit and the answer is
complicatedly are we a tournament
species are we a pair bonding species
what's up with that what we will see is
we're kinda in between when you look at
the degree of sexual dimorphism we are
not like baboons but we're sure not like
marmosets we're somewhere in the middle
variability is somewhere in the middle
there I'm not going near that one life
span and the dimorphism and life span
tends to be in-between and parental
behavior and likelihood of all of those
you look at a number of measures and by
next lecture we looking at some genetics
of what monogamous species and
tournament species look like and we're
right in the middle in other words that
explains like 90% of literature because
we're not a classic tournament species
and we're not a classic pair-bonding one
we are terribly confused in the middle
there and everything about anthropology
supports that most people on the planet
right now are in a form of monogamous
relationships in a culture that allows
that demands monogamy an awful lot of
people who are in monogamous
relationships in such cultures are
really monogamous relationships
traditionally most cultures on this
planet allow polygamy nonetheless and
most of those polygamous cultures the
majority of individuals were pair bonded
and monogamous you get two different
versions of polygamy in different social
systems of humans one is economic
polygamy which is you're basically
sitting around and the wealthiest guy in
the village is the one who can have the
largest number of wives an enormous skew
and reproductive success that's driven
by economics the other type is
demographic you have a culture where for
example you have a warrior class guys
spent ten years as warriors warriors
warriors in New York City accent as
warriors they don't worry there's no
anxiety but they eventually worry about
getting a life because by the time
they're done being a warrior they're
like 25 and they marry someone who's 13
which is what you see in a lot of
traditional cultures that follow that
pattern and at that point you've got a
problem which is an awful lot of those
guys have been killed over the course of
10 years of being involved in high
levels of aggression and ten more years
of life expected you to catch up with
you there's a shortage of males
so you see polygamy they're driven by
demographics and you see polygamy driven
by economics and other types of society
so most cultures on this planet allow
traditionally before the missionaries
got them most cultures on this planet
allow polygamy nonetheless within most
polygamous cultures the majority of
people are not polygamists we have one
really confused screwed up species here
because we are halfway in between and
all sorts of these measures okay so what
do we have next which we will pick up on
on Friday what we've just started with
here is the first case of using all
these principles individual selection
kin selection reciprocal
altruism to understand all sorts of
aspects of behavior we will then move on
to seeing how they explain other aspects
of animal behavior some ones which if
you are behaving for the good of the
species circa 1960 there is no
explanation at all because you're doing
things like killing other members of
your species and then finally we will
see how this applies to humans and some
of the witheringly appropriate for more
please visit us at stanford.edu